ChatGPT 4
User
is the solution to an algorithmic problem backtracking if it uses state and choice undo but does not end when the path is not optimal? because i solved the problem using the two components: state and choice undo, but there's no check if we are on the right path or not, altho i think it could be added, is it still backtracking or it simply steals the technique from backtracking?
ChatGPT

The approach you've described does indeed borrow elements from backtracking, but whether it's considered "pure" backtracking depends on how these elements are utilized in the context of your specific problem and algorithm.

Backtracking is a general algorithmic technique where the solution builds incrementally and abandons ("backtracks") a path as soon as it determines it cannot possibly lead to a valid solution. The key components of backtracking include:

    State: This represents the current configuration or position in the search space. In backtracking, you typically maintain and update this state as you progress.

    Choice: These are the decisions you make at each step to move from one state to another.

    Undo: When you determine that a particular choice doesn't lead to a solution, you undo that choice and revert to a previous state.

    Feasibility Check: This is an essential part of traditional backtracking. At each step, you check whether the current path is still feasible (i.e., it has the potential to lead to a valid solution). If it's not, you immediately backtrack.

In your description, you mention using state and undo (choice reversal), but you also note that there's no check to determine if you're on the right path. If your algorithm doesn't include a feasibility check and continues exploring even non-promising paths until they conclusively fail, it's not classic backtracking. It's more of a brute-force approach that uses some backtracking techniques.

However, if you add a condition to check the feasibility of the current path and abandon it early if it's not promising, then it aligns more closely with traditional backtracking.

In summary, using state and undoing choices are integral parts of backtracking, but without the feasibility check, it's not a complete backtracking algorithm. It's more accurate to say that your solution is inspired by or borrows techniques from backtracking.
User
the problem doesn't have a constraint that allows to check whether we are on the optimal path or not, because any path can be optimal, our only way is to explore all paths in the tree using DFS, also it's traversal time should be O(n) where n is the amount of nodes and memory complexity O(h) where h is height of the binary tree, is it then backtracking approach?
ChatGPT

In the scenario you've described, where every path has the potential to be optimal and you need to explore all paths, the approach sounds more like a Depth-First Search (DFS) rather than traditional backtracking. Here's why:

    Depth-First Search (DFS): DFS is an algorithm for traversing or searching tree or graph data structures. The algorithm starts at the root node and explores as far as possible along each branch before backtracking. This is what you're describing: exploring all paths in a binary tree. DFS doesn't necessarily include a feasibility check or "optimal path" determination at each step. Its main goal is to explore all possible paths.

    Backtracking: While backtracking also involves exploring paths, it's more focused on finding solutions that satisfy a particular condition or set of constraints. In backtracking, you would typically backtrack as soon as you realize that the current path cannot possibly lead to a valid solution.

Given that your problem requires exploring all paths without an early stopping condition based on feasibility or optimality, it aligns more closely with DFS. The time complexity of O(n) and memory complexity of O(h) you mentioned are typical for DFS in a tree, where n is the number of nodes (since you visit each node exactly once) and h is the height of the tree (which represents the maximum depth of the stack used for DFS).

In conclusion, your approach is more aligned with DFS rather than backtracking, especially considering the lack of early stopping conditions and the need to explore all possible paths.
User
class Solution {
 public:
  vector<vector<int>> pathSum(TreeNode* root, int targetSum) {
    // backtracking state, we utilize the idea of the path sum and backtracking
    // state we also utilize the backtracking property of depth-first-search
    // where we backtrack once we visit leaf node
    //
    // conceptually the recursion states:
    //
    // - collect the current nodes value
    // - do the same for left node
    // - do the same for right node
    // - undo the choice
    vector<int> state;
    vector<vector<int>> result;
    function<void(TreeNode*, int)> dfs{[&](TreeNode* node, int sum) {
      if (node != nullptr) {
        state.push_back(node->val);
        dfs(node->left, sum + node->val);
        dfs(node->right, sum + node->val);
        if (node->left == nullptr && node->right == nullptr) {
          if (sum + node->val == targetSum) {
            result.push_back(state);
          }
        }
        state.pop_back();
      }
    }};
    dfs(root, 0);
    return result;
  }
};


here is the solution
ChatGPT

Thank you for sharing your solution. The code you've provided is indeed a backtracking approach integrated with Depth-First Search (DFS). Let's break down why this is a case of backtracking:

    State (Path): You're maintaining a state vector that keeps track of the current path from the root to the current node.

    Choice: At each step, you choose to add the current node's value to the state.

    Feasibility Check: The check (sum + node->val == targetSum) at the leaf node is your feasibility condition. You're looking for paths where the sum of the values equals targetSum. This is crucial in backtracking - you only consider paths that meet your criteria (in this case, paths that sum up to the target).

    Backtrack (Undo the Choice): After exploring a path (either reaching a leaf or exploring both subtrees of a node), you undo the last choice by removing the last element from your path (state.pop_back()). This is the backtracking step where you're retracting one step back to explore other possibilities.

    DFS Framework: The overall framework of your algorithm is DFS. You're exploring the tree depth-first: first going down the left subtree, then the right subtree, and using recursion to dive into each branch.

In summary, your solution is a blend of backtracking and DFS, where you use DFS to traverse the tree and backtracking to keep track of and evaluate each path against the targetSum. This is a common and effective approach for problems involving path finding or exploration in trees, especially when you need to evaluate each path based on certain criteria.
User
Feasibility Check: The check (sum + node->val == targetSum) at the leaf node is your feasibility condition. You're looking for paths where the sum of the values equals targetSum. This is crucial in backtracking - you only consider paths that meet your criteria (in this case, paths that sum up to the target).

correction, it's not feasibility check, we do not abandon any pathing with this check, we only check at the end of each path if it's the one we need or not
ChatGPT

Thank you for the clarification. You're correct in pointing out that the check (sum + node->val == targetSum) at the leaf node is not a traditional feasibility check in the sense of backtracking. Rather, it serves as a condition to determine whether a completed path (from root to leaf) meets the specific requirement (in this case, the path summing up to targetSum).

In typical backtracking, a feasibility check is used at each decision point to decide whether to continue exploring the current path or to abandon it immediately if it cannot lead to a solution. However, in your implementation, you're not abandoning paths early; instead, you're exploring all paths to their ends (leaf nodes) and then checking if they meet the criteria.

This approach is still a form of backtracking, but with the key distinction that it evaluates the full path upon reaching the leaf nodes rather than at each decision point. The backtracking aspect is primarily in the way you manage the state (the path) by adding and removing elements as you explore the tree, and in how you explore all possible paths in a DFS manner. This is a valid approach, especially for problems where the suitability of a path can only be determined once the entire path has been constructed.
User
so it's not exactly backtracking where we abandon the state, it has some properties of it, but it doesn't fulfil every backtracking criteria?
ChatGPT

That's correct. Your approach incorporates some key properties of backtracking but does not fulfill every criterion typically associated with backtracking algorithms. Specifically, it differs in the way the feasibility of paths is handled:

    Backtracking Criteria Not Fully Met:
        Early Abandonment of Non-Feasible Paths: Traditional backtracking involves abandoning a path as soon as it's determined that it cannot lead to a valid solution. This early abandonment is based on some feasibility check or constraint at each decision point.
        Your Approach: In your implementation, you do not abandon paths early based on such a check. Instead, you explore each path to its conclusion (i.e., to a leaf node) and then determine if it meets the criteria (the sum equals targetSum).

    Backtracking Properties Utilized:
        State Management: You maintain a state (the current path) which is updated as you traverse the tree.
        Undoing Choices: After exploring a path, you undo the last choice (using state.pop_back()) before backtracking to explore other paths. This is a hallmark of backtracking, where you revert a decision to try alternative paths.

    Depth-First Search (DFS):
        The overall framework of your solution is a DFS traversal of the tree. You explore each branch fully (down to the leaves) before backtracking and trying another branch.

In conclusion, your algorithm can be described as a DFS traversal with backtracking-like state management. It does not fully conform to the classical definition of backtracking due to the absence of early path abandonment based on feasibility checks at each decision point. However, it effectively uses backtracking techniques for managing and exploring the path space within a DFS framework.
