explain me c++ algorithm to check if a binary tree is symmetric and what problems each line of code explains, and explain me recurrence relation conceptually, for example like this:

N-th permutation is a combination of current number and n-1th permutation of all other numbers excluding current one.


print current node
do the same for left
do the same for right

in code:

print(node->val)
dfs(node->left)
dfs(node->right)
ChatGPT

To check if a binary tree is symmetric, we essentially need to verify if the left and right subtrees of the tree are mirror images of each other. This involves checking the left subtree of the left node against the right subtree of the right node and vice versa at each level.

Here's a conceptual breakdown of the algorithm and its corresponding C++ code:

    Base Case for Recursion: If both nodes are nullptr, it means we have reached the end of both subtrees simultaneously, indicating symmetry up to this point. If one is nullptr and the other isn't, it means the structure is asymmetric.

    cpp

if (left == nullptr || right == nullptr)
    return left == right;

Check Current Node: Compare the values of the current nodes in the two subtrees. If they are not equal, the tree is not symmetric.

cpp

if (left->val != right->val) return false;

Recursive Checks: Check the left subtree of the left node against the right subtree of the right node, and the right subtree of the left node against the left subtree of the right node. This is the core of the symmetry check.

cpp

    return isMirror(left->left, right->right) && isMirror(left->right, right->left);

The complete function in C++ would look something like this:

cpp

bool isMirror(TreeNode* left, TreeNode* right) {
    if (left == nullptr || right == nullptr)
        return left == right;
    if (left->val != right->val) return false;
    return isMirror(left->left, right->right) && isMirror(left->right, right->left);
}

bool isSymmetric(TreeNode* root) {
    if (root == nullptr) return true;
    return isMirror(root->left, root->right);
}

Recurrence Relation Conceptually:

The concept of a recurrence relation in this context can be thought of as breaking down the larger problem (is the entire tree symmetric?) into smaller, similar subproblems (are these two subtrees mirror images of each other?).

    Each call to isMirror checks a pair of nodes – one from the left subtree and one from the right subtree.
    If these nodes are symmetric (equal value and their respective children are symmetric), the function continues to check further down the tree.
    This process repeats, moving deeper into the tree, until it either finds an asymmetric condition or confirms that all corresponding pairs of nodes are symmetric.

In each recursive call, the problem is reduced to checking symmetry in smaller subtrees. This is analogous to the way the "N-th permutation" concept breaks down a larger problem (finding the N-th permutation) into smaller ones (finding permutations of the remaining elements).
User
if left and right subtrees are mirrors of each other, which means at each point in time we check left->left against right->right
and left->right against right->left

holy hell i tried everything except that and i feel like i didn't learn anything
ChatGPT

It's completely normal to encounter challenges while learning and implementing algorithms, especially those involving recursive concepts like tree traversal. The key takeaway is in understanding the pattern and logic behind the algorithm, which can then be applied to solve similar problems in the future.

In the case of checking if a binary tree is symmetric, the core idea is indeed to compare mirrored nodes: left->left with right->right and left->right with right->left. This might seem counterintuitive at first, but it's precisely how symmetry is defined for a binary tree.

Let's break down why this works:

    Symmetry in Binary Trees: Symmetry in a binary tree is defined as a mirror image about its center. Therefore, for each node, its left and right children must mirror the right and left children, respectively, of the corresponding node in the other subtree.

    Recursive Approach: The recursive approach fits perfectly for this problem because binary trees are naturally recursive structures. Each subtree of a binary tree is itself a binary tree.

    Left and Right Checks: When we compare left->left with right->right, we're essentially checking if the left subtree of the left child mirrors the right subtree of the right child. Similarly, comparing left->right with right->left checks if the right subtree of the left child mirrors the left subtree of the right child.

    Base Case and Edge Cases: The base cases handle scenarios where one or both of the nodes are nullptr. This is crucial for determining if both subtrees are of the same structure and size, which is a prerequisite for symmetry.

Learning from such experiences is a key part of the journey in programming and algorithmic thinking. Each challenge you encounter and solve helps in building a deeper understanding and intuition for solving similar problems in the future. Keep experimenting and iterating on your approaches, and over time, these concepts will become more intuitive.
User
how could i have noticed that the recurrence says,

compare left and right subtree:
- check left node in left tree against right node in right tree
- check right node in left tree against left node in right tree

jesus, i failed to notice that recursive problem statement, i didn't even try to break the tree in two parts, in half... and treat them separately, i might have noticed that recurrence relation
ChatGPT

Understanding and recognizing the pattern in recursive problems, especially in tree-based algorithms, can indeed be challenging. Here are some strategies that might help you notice and formulate such recurrence relations in the future:

    Visualize the Tree Structure: Draw the tree and visually inspect its structure. For symmetry, you would draw mirror images and quickly notice how the left child of one subtree mirrors the right child of the other subtree and vice versa.

    Break Down the Problem: Start by considering a smaller version of the problem. In the case of a symmetric tree, consider a tree with just three nodes: a root and two children. Ask yourself, what needs to be true for this tree to be symmetric?

    Identify Symmetric Properties: In a symmetric binary tree, each left subtree is a mirror image of the right subtree. This naturally leads to the conclusion that you need to compare left->left with right->right and left->right with right->left.

    Think Recursively: Remember that in recursive problems, the solution often involves making the same decision at each step or node. In this case, at each node, you make a decision: does this node and its corresponding node in the mirrored position have the same value and structure?

    Trace Simple Examples: Run through simple examples step by step. Use a simple tree first, and trace out how you would manually check if it's symmetric. This can often reveal the recursive nature of the problem.

    Understand the Nature of Binary Trees: Binary trees lend themselves to recursive solutions. If a problem involves a binary tree, start by thinking about how you might apply a recursive approach.

    Look for Symmetry in the Problem Statement: The problem statement often contains hints. If the problem is to check for symmetry, then it's logical to assume that you'll be making comparisons between two halves of a structure.

    Practice and Experience: Finally, the more problems you solve, the more patterns you'll start to recognize. Practice different tree problems, and over time, you'll develop an intuition for these kinds of recursive relationships.

Don't be discouraged by the challenge. Recursive thinking, especially in tree structures, is a skill that develops over time with practice and experience. Each problem you tackle, whether successfully or not, contributes to building your problem-solving skills.
User
i already did this step

Trace Simple Examples: Run through simple examples step by step. Use a simple tree first, and trace out how you would manually check if it's symmetric. This can often reveal the recursive nature of the problem.

however even though i recognized which nodes i check, i didn't notice that i treat them as

left node of left subtree against right node of right subtree
right node of left subtree against left node of right subtree

holy hell...
ChatGPT

It sounds like you're on the right track with tracing simple examples. The key to noticing the specific pattern of comparison in the symmetric tree problem lies in focusing on the symmetry aspect. Here's a more detailed approach to guide your thought process:

    Start with a Simple Symmetric Tree: Consider a tree with just three nodes: the root, a left child, and a right child. This is the simplest form of a symmetric tree. Ask yourself, for this tree to be symmetric, what must be true about the left and right children?

    Expand the Tree: Add another level to the tree, giving the left and right children their own children. Now, your tree has a root, two children, and four grandchildren. This is where the pattern starts to emerge. For this larger tree to be symmetric, the left child of the left node must mirror the right child of the right node, and the right child of the left node must mirror the left child of the right node.

    Focus on Mirrored Pairs: Concentrate on how each pair of nodes (one from the left subtree and one from the right subtree) compares. In a symmetric tree, these pairs are mirrored reflections of each other.

    Recursive Insight: Realize that this pattern of comparing mirrored pairs repeats at every level of the tree. This is your recursive insight. At each step in your recursion, you are essentially shrinking the tree and applying the same logic to a smaller subtree.

    Write Down Your Observations: Sometimes, writing down what you observe can help solidify your understanding. For each level of your example tree, write down which nodes you are comparing. This can help in visualizing the recursive nature of the problem.

    Recall the Definition of Symmetry: Symmetry, by definition, involves comparing two halves of a structure to see if they are mirrored versions of each other. Applying this concept to a binary tree naturally leads to comparing nodes across the two halves of the tree in a mirrored fashion.

Remember, the process of learning to recognize these patterns in algorithmic problems is gradual. Each problem you work through, even if it doesn't immediately yield the correct insight, is contributing to your overall understanding and ability to recognize these patterns in the future. Keep practicing, and over time, these insights will start to come more naturally.
User
class Solution {
public:
    bool isSymmetric(TreeNode* root) {
        function<bool(TreeNode*, TreeNode*)> solve{[&](TreeNode* left, TreeNode* right) {
            if (left == nullptr || right == nullptr) {
                return left == right; // Why?
            }
            if (left->val != right->val) return false;
            return solve(left->left, right->right) && solve(left->right, right->left);
        }};
        return solve(root->left, root->right);
    }
};


why does it check one pointer sameness against other? why are the two pointers the same when the tree is symmetric?
ChatGPT

The line return left == right; in the isSymmetric function is a crucial part of the logic to check if a binary tree is symmetric. Let's break down what this line does and why it's important:

    Checking for Null Pointers: This line is checking if either left or right is nullptr. In the context of a binary tree, nullptr signifies the end of a branch.

    Symmetry in Structure: For a tree to be symmetric, it must not only have mirrored values but also mirrored structure. This means that if one side of the tree has a null branch at a certain point, the mirrored side must also have a null branch at the corresponding point. If one is null and the other is not, then the tree cannot be symmetric because the structures of the left and right subtrees differ.

    Handling Edge Cases: This line elegantly handles several edge cases:
        If both left and right are nullptr, it returns true, as reaching the end of both subtrees simultaneously implies symmetry up to this point.
        If one is nullptr and the other is not, it returns false, as this indicates an asymmetry in the tree structure.

    Why Compare Pointers Directly?: Comparing the pointers directly is an efficient way to check if both are nullptr or if one is nullptr and the other is not. It's a shorthand for:
        If both are nullptr, then left == right is true.
        If one is nullptr and the other is not, then left == right is false.

    Ensuring Structural Symmetry: This line is not about checking the equality of values stored in the nodes (that's done in the next line with left->val != right->val). Instead, it's ensuring that the tree has a symmetric structure, a necessary condition for the tree to be symmetric overall.

In summary, this line is a fundamental check for structural symmetry in the tree, ensuring that both sides mirror each other not only in values but also in their overall structure.
2 / 2
User
ah so basically both must be null at the end, and if either is null, we protect ourselves against accessing value of nullptr, we basically want both to be nullptr at the end to indicate end = true, but if only one is nullptr and other one isn't the we indicate end = false because we check two different values?
ChatGPT

Yes, you've got it exactly right. This part of the code is a crucial safety check and also an essential aspect of ensuring the tree's symmetry. Let's break it down a bit more:

    Both Must Be Null at the End: For a binary tree to be symmetric, both subtrees (left and right) must mirror each other not only in terms of values but also in structure. This means that if one subtree ends (indicated by nullptr), the mirrored subtree must end at the same point. So if both left and right are nullptr, it indicates that both subtrees have ended symmetrically at this point.

    Protect Against Accessing nullptr: If either left or right is nullptr and the other is not, it means one subtree has more nodes than the other, breaking the symmetry. In this case, the function returns false. This check also prevents a segmentation fault that would occur if you tried to access a member of a nullptr (like left->val or right->val).

    End Condition for Symmetry Check: The condition left == right effectively handles these cases:
        Both left and right are nullptr (end of both subtrees reached simultaneously) - returns true.
        One is nullptr and the other is not (asymmetry in structure) - returns false.

    Indicating the End of the Recursion: This line is a base case in your recursion. It tells the recursive function when to stop and what to return when it hits the bottom of the tree. In recursion, base cases are essential to prevent infinite loops and to provide a clear exit point.

So, your understanding is correct: this line ensures that both subtrees have the same structure (both end at the same time or both continue). If there's a discrepancy in structure, the tree cannot be symmetric, and the function returns false.
