even though i built using x64-windows-static, i keep getting linker errors, now i get many many more errors and different ones than before, what the hell am i doing wrong

---

Linker errors can be frustrating, and they can arise from various factors, such as mismatches between the build configuration, incorrect library linkage, or other project-specific settings. Here's a structured approach to help you identify and resolve the issue:

    Ensure Correct Triplet Configuration:
        Verify that the custom triplet (e.g., x64-windows-static) is properly defined.
        Check if the custom triplet is actually being used in the build.

    Check Build Configuration:
        Ensure that both the library and your code are built with the same configuration (Debug/Release) and the same architecture (x64).
        Make sure that the Runtime Library setting is consistent between the library and your code (e.g., Multi-threaded Debug DLL or Multi-threaded DLL).

    Inspect Library and Include Paths:
        Review the paths specified in the CMakeLists.txt or build configuration.
        Verify that the paths are pointing to the correct directories for the include files and libraries.

    Review Linking Commands:
        Look at the linking commands generated by CMake (e.g., in the build logs).
        Check if the correct libraries are being linked and that the order of linking is correct.

    Clean and Rebuild:
        Sometimes, artifacts from previous builds can interfere. Try cleaning the build directory and rebuilding the project.

    Investigate Specific Errors:
        Look at the specific linker errors you are receiving. These errors can provide clues about what is going wrong.

    Debug with Minimal Code:
        If possible, create a minimal reproduction project that isolates the issue. This can make it easier to identify what's going wrong without other code interfering.

    Consult vcpkg's Documentation and Community:
        Sometimes, there may be known issues or specific guidance related to the libraries you are using. Check vcpkg's GitHub issues, forums, or documentation.

    Consider Manual Building as a Last Resort:
        If all else fails, you could consider manually building the libraries, as you've done before. This approach can give you more control but may also be more time-consuming.

Remember, debugging complex build issues is often an iterative process. You may need to try different solutions, carefully observe the results, and refine your approach. By following a systematic methodology, you can incrementally narrow down the problem and find a solution.

It's worth noting that this process aligns with the principles of deliberate practice, as it involves focused problem-solving, careful observation, and learning from each step. By documenting what you try and what you learn, you can also create valuable reference material for future projects or for others facing similar challenges.

---

using x64-mingw-static worked, but using x64-windows-static doesn't work, what the hell?

---

The discrepancy you're observing between x64-mingw-static and x64-windows-static could be related to differences in the toolchain and settings used by these triplets. Here's how you can further investigate and potentially resolve this issue:

    Compare the Triplets:
        Look at the definitions of both x64-mingw-static and x64-windows-static in the vcpkg triplet configuration files.
        Identify the differences in terms of the compiler, build flags, and other settings.

    Check the Compiler Compatibility:
        The x64-windows-static triplet typically uses MSVC, while x64-mingw-static uses MinGW.
        Check whether the library you are linking to has specific compatibility issues with one of the compilers.

    Inspect the Build Logs:
        Review the detailed build logs for both triplet configurations to identify differences in how the build is being performed.
        Look for any warnings, errors, or unusual messages that might hint at the underlying issue.

    Verify Linking and Compilation Flags:
        Ensure that the flags and options used for both linking and compiling are consistent with what the library expects.

    Try a Clean Rebuild:
        If you haven't already, try cleaning the build directories and rebuilding with x64-windows-static to ensure no lingering artifacts are causing problems.

    Investigate Specific Errors:
        Analyze the specific linker errors when using x64-windows-static. The errors themselves may offer clues to the underlying issue.

    Consult the Library's Documentation:
        Check the library's documentation or forums to see if there are known issues or guidance for using it with MSVC or MinGW.

    Consider Reporting the Issue:
        If the behavior seems inconsistent or incorrect, consider reporting it as an issue to the vcpkg maintainers or the library's maintainers.

    Explore Workarounds:
        If all else fails, and if x64-mingw-static is working for your needs, you may choose to use that triplet for your project.

Linking and building with different compilers and configurations can be complex, and small differences in settings can lead to seemingly perplexing behavior. By carefully analyzing the differences between the two triplets and systematically investigating the issue, you can likely identify the root cause and correct it.

Keep in mind that engaging in this kind of problem-solving not only helps you resolve the immediate issue but also contributes to your growth as a programmer and independent learner, especially when you document your findings and reflect on what you've learned.

---

so its possibly a compiler missmatch?

---

Yes, a compiler mismatch could be at the core of the problem you are experiencing. Here's how a compiler mismatch might manifest:

    Different Compilers: If the library was compiled with one compiler (e.g., MSVC) and you're trying to link it with a project compiled with a different compiler (e.g., MinGW), you might encounter linking errors. The calling conventions, name mangling, and binary formats may differ between compilers, leading to incompatibility.

    Different Compiler Versions or Settings: Even if you're using the same compiler, differences in the version or compiler settings (such as optimization level, standard library version, etc.) can cause issues.

    Static vs Dynamic Linking: The triplet specification includes whether the library is being built statically or dynamically. Mixing static and dynamic linking or failing to define the proper macros when linking can lead to problems.

    Triplets Configuration: As mentioned, the specific configuration in the x64-windows-static vs x64-mingw-static triplet files might differ significantly. This could include the compiler used, build options, linkage settings, etc.

    Platform-Specific Code: Sometimes libraries include platform or compiler-specific code that may not be compatible with all compilers or settings.

Here's what you can do to investigate further:

    Identify Compiler Used for the Library: Check which compiler was used to build the library under each triplet. Make sure it matches the compiler you're using for your project.

    Check Compiler Versions and Settings: If you're using the same compiler, make sure the versions and settings are compatible.

    Inspect the Triplets Configuration: Look at the triplet files in vcpkg to see what settings they are using. There might be clues there about why one is working and the other is not.

    Consider Rebuilding the Library: If you have control over how the library is built, you might try rebuilding it with the same compiler and settings you're using for your project.

    Consult Documentation: See if the library's documentation has specific instructions or requirements regarding compilers and linking.

A compiler mismatch is one possibility, but it requires careful investigation to confirm if that's indeed the issue or if something else is going on. The process of resolving this kind of issue is a valuable learning opportunity, especially for an independent learner like yourself. It provides hands-on experience with build systems, linking, compilers, and other essential aspects of software development.

---

how can i check which compiler vcpkg used to build it?

---

You can check which compiler vcpkg used to build the library by following these steps:

    Check the Toolchain File: If you're using CMake with vcpkg, the toolchain file should specify which compiler is being used. Look in the vcpkg.cmake file in your vcpkg directory.

    Check the Build Logs: During the build process, vcpkg generates logs that include information about the compiler being used. You can find these logs in the buildtrees directory inside your vcpkg installation path. Look for files with .log extension, specifically inside the directory related to the package you are building. Open the log file, and you should see information about the compiler and its version.

    Inspect the Triplet Configuration: Open the triplet file that was used to build the library (e.g., x64-windows-static.cmake or x64-mingw-static.cmake) in the triplets directory of your vcpkg installation. It might contain information about the compiler or other build settings.

    Use the Command Line: If you want to see the default triplet and compiler, you can run a command like ./vcpkg help triplet in the vcpkg directory. While this doesn't directly tell you the compiler, it can give you the default triplet, which you can then inspect as described in the previous step.

    Rebuild with Verbose Output: You can rebuild the library with verbose output to see more details about the build process, including the compiler being used. Run the vcpkg install command with the --debug flag, like this:

    ruby

    ./vcpkg install <package-name>:<triplet> --debug

    This will print detailed information about the build process, including the compiler commands.

    Check CMake Configuration: If the library is using CMake for its build system, you might find information about the compiler in the CMake configuration files. Look in the CMakeLists.txt file and any included CMake modules for the project.

The exact steps might vary depending on the specific package and how vcpkg is configured on your system, but these general approaches should help you identify the compiler being used.
