How to understand beginners

sometimes i self reflect and think how much i see yet when other people see me
they don't see what i see, they see my shell, my body, they see me walking, i
may say a few words, yet they won't see what i see, probably none will see what
i see, if i with these insights can't see what my sister see who talks to me all
the time and i talk to her, absolute understanding is not possible, so what is
it that i can do to contribute to understanding? sometimes i see how i see the
whole word of my conclusions, ideas, visions, things i say i *see*, and i often
wonder, how do others not see it? it is so obvious? nothing is obvious, one can
learn only what he already knows

that leads me to think of what is it that other people see that i do not see,
that makes me think when i see another human being, what is the world behind
that person? what is his story? what is on that person's mind? what does that
person see that i see? if i see things that others do not see, what is it that
person sees that i do not see? each person is a world and all i see is what's
on the outside, what the person says, i will never be able to see what's on
that person's mind

that feels fascinating how that person has the whole world in the mind and i
can't be part of it, it is fascinating when i see people as "world"

all the time when i experience new sensation, i imagine how do i feel about it,
then i project that to another person, oh, is this how people who experience
something for the first time feel about it?

today i practiced drawing, i practiced drawing lines, moving my whole arm to
draw a line, circle, square, triangle, full focus to draw correctly, all i see
is what the person in tutorial says, move an arm, draw a line, draw a triangle,
i have no idea about any of the things that person says, i am a complete novice
and everything is extraordinary that tutorial guy says

then i think, is this how another person who is learning the topics i already
know and have complex mental maps how to study them feel? that person is
clueless of what to do, what to improve, how to improve, and if i type out a
chunk of text, that chunk of text is potential big waste of time, that person
has to research everything i write out as an advice, do i ever consider how
does that person who im advising feels about my advice? etc...
